Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Helen Pearson. She's a science
journalist, author, and chief magazine editor for for the
journal Nature, where she oversees the journal. Lisbon opinion
content and today we're going to talk about her
latest book Beyond Belief How Evidence shows what really
Works. So Helen, welcome to the show. It's a
big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for asking me to be
on the show. I'm happy to be here.
OK, so as the title or uh the subtitle
of your book implies, we're going to talk a
lot about evidence today and why have evidence is
so important. But what is actually the premise of
your book? I mean, how would you characterize it?
I would say it says that in a world
full of misinformation and conflicting claims, then evidence from
science can show us what's nonsense and what's not,
I guess, um. But the, the, the, the, the
easiest way to actually describe it is to probably
tell you how I came to write the book.
Can I, can I just do that? OK, so,
so, so, so the story is, um, so during
my previous book, which was, um, called The Life
Project, I, I met and interviewed this remarkable person
who, um, called Ian Chalmers, who is a doctor
and researcher in the UK. Um, AND he kind
of told me his story, and this kind of
introduced me to the, the history of the modern
evidence movement. Um, SO, so his story is that
he was training to be a doctor in the
UK in the 60s and early 70s, um, and
he was in obstetrics and gynecology. And he noticed
something odd about the profession, which was when two
doctors gave out advice for the same condition, they
would often give out very different advice. So, you
know, one doctor might say bed rest is really
important, or prenatal vitamins, or, you know, not eating
or drinking during labor, and another doctor would say
no such thing. Um, AND, and what would often
happen in medicine generally was that everyone would just
follow the advice of the most senior doctor in
the room, and, um, that's sometimes now called eminence-based
medicine. Um, SO, uh, to, to Chalmers, this just
seemed really puzzling, like, you know, which treatment was
most effective and which doctor was he supposed to
believe. And then he came across this influential book
in 19 published in 1972 by a doctor called
Archie Cochrane. Um, AND Cochrane argued that the best
way to find out whether one treatment is more
effective than another is to use rigorous, um, evidence
from experiments or from observational studies, and he also
argued that the most, um, sort of unbiased form
of evidence is from randomized controlled trials where, um,
scientists assign people, uh, the same types of people
to. To um control and treatment groups and then
see whether the treatment group improves faster. So, so
this was really inspiring to Ian Chalmers. He'd never
even heard of randomized controls, uh, before, um, even
though he trained to be a doctor, right? Um,
AND, and because of this, he, he decided to
do this really pioneering work where, um, he went
off and brought together all of the controlled clinical
trials that had been done that tested. Um, TREATMENTS
in pregnancy and childbirth, and, and not only did
he bring them together, but he synthesized them, so
he, he brought together similar studies, um, uh, to
try and sort of see what the the entire
body of knowledge showed. Um, AND this basically revealed
that many practices in pregnancy and childbirth were either
not based on evidence or actively doing harm, um,
so for example, um, Bed rest wasn't based on
anything particular, you know, any particular strong evidence base,
um, even invasive processes like shaving women's pubic hair
during labor or conducting episiotomies, which is a surgical
incision. Um, WERE, were not based on solid evidence,
and so, um, you know, so countless women had
been subjected to these highly invasive and degrading practices,
but just because doctors assumed they were the right
thing to do. And, and, um, and, and Ian
Chalmers' work helped bring an end to them, and
it became part of this bigger movement towards evidence-based
medicine. It was, it was really influential in that,
um, of, of moving medicine from this this eminence-based
approach into this evidence-based approach. So, sorry for the
long story, but it's sort of, through, through someone's,
you know, story, we can kind of see how
that, that whole field made the change. And by
the way, and that, that's what inspired the book.
To go back to your original question.
No, no, yes, of course, I mean, then we're
going to go back to the history of evidence-based
medicine, particularly later on, but Archie Cochrane is the
one that who gave the name to Cochrane Libraries,
right?
Exactly, exactly, yes, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, OK, so I mean, but,
but why should people care about evidence and particularly
nowadays, as you said at the very beginning, since
the internet is filled with misinformation, medical misinformation, scientific
misinformation more generally, and Very unfortunately there are more
and more people apparently moving away from evidence-based science.
I mean, what would you tell those people? I
mean, how, why should they care about evidence?
Well, I think they should care now more than
ever because, exactly because of the problem you just
talked about, um, you know, when the world is
filled with all this misinformation on, on social media.
Evidence provides us with a way to, you know,
to, to, to guide us towards what, what really
works. Um, SO it, it, it's, it's all it's
empowering. I mean, I really wanted the book to
be empowering, to, to help people understand, you know,
why the world had moved towards evidence in the
first place and perhaps how they could use it
in their own lives.
OK, and uh let's uh let me ask you
a very basic question, but which I think is
very important for us to explore here. What is
evidence? I mean, what do we mean by evidence?
Yeah, it's such a great question, and I think
there's lots of kind of um confusion about it
and, and uh people use it in different ways.
So, so the dictionary definition of evidence is um
information which indicates whether a belief or proposition is
true or valid. Um, SO it's, so it's information,
right, and, and I think that, that probably when
a lot of people talk about it, or certainly,
you know, when, when the scientists I interviewed talk
about it, they, they use it as being synonymous
with evidence from science, so from rigorous kind of
studies. Um, BUT there are other forms of evidence,
so there's evidence in a court of law, which
is just information which is produced in that court.
Um, THERE'S evidence. From lived experience, right? People's experiences
in the world is also information. And, and so,
um, so when I was, I mean, I did
have to define it at the beginning of my
book because I am mostly talking about scientific evidence,
um, and, you know, often that is considered the
most rigorous kind of, uh, form of evidence, but
I think it's really important actually to not invalidate
other forms of knowledge, and maybe we'll come onto
that. Um, BUT, but the key, I think that
the way that the, the term is sort of,
I think, can lead to confusion is, um, that
because it has this sort of wide range of
meeting, you know, meanings to just mean like, oh,
a bit of information, a bit of data, then
sometimes people attach it to things, um, you know,
to say something is evidence-based, when maybe it, it,
it's not as rigorous as, as we might hope.
So you sort of see the term evidence-based pop
up all over the place. Um, LIKE, I, I
searched on Amazon the other day, um, and found,
uh, Evidence-based book, this is books, evidence-based horsemanship, um,
evidence-based golf, um, and so, you know, maybe there's
some great science in those fields. I'm not, I'm
not saying that those books are bad. I'm just
saying, you sort of see it attached a lot
to things, and, and it doesn't necessarily mean what
the kind of real advocates of the evidence movement
are, are talking about, I think.
But how is evidence established? I mean, how do
we establish that a particular piece of information is
evidence or should be treated as such?
Well, in science, it's because the evidence would have
been produced by particular methods which scientists hope produced
something which is trustworthy. So, um, I, I already
mentioned randomized controlled trials, which is sometimes held up
as a kind of, you know, gold standard method.
Um, BECAUSE it tries to, but by the way
it's done, it tries to even out all the
other factors that could, let's say, um, cause a,
cause an illness, um, or, or lead to a,
um, a, a change, um, so that we can
have real confidence, right, that, that the result is,
um, is caused by, let's say, a drug. Um,
SO, so it's through these methods, I think, which
scientists have developed over years, which, um, and, and
through the kind of rigor with which they've analyzed
that data, that, that we have more confidence in
those pieces of information. But, I mean, even within
science, you know, there are different sort of, I
mean, some people, you know, put them in hierarchies,
there are different kind of tiers, I suppose, of,
of, um, rigor or reliability that scientists attach to
different forms of evidence.
And historically, when exactly did people start caring more
about evidence when it comes to how medicine and
science are approached, and I mean, how did things
work before that?
Well, in a way, I think people have kind
of always used evidence of a type, right, because
I mean, throughout human history, we've wanted to know
whether something that we do on, on a personal
level, like people will have been observing, did this
work, like, you know, did it work when I,
I don't know. ATE these berries, or did they
make me sick, I mean we're, we're accruing that
personal experience all the time, but in terms of
sort of doing more systematic studies, I mean that
was sort of really, sort of example, the first
randomized control trials, I mean very early ones were,
were being done by, um, Doctors really, uh, sort
of in the 1700s, um, and so there was
this famous, for example, early randomized trial done by
James Lind, I don't know if you might have
heard this one, he became very famous for, um,
doing this, this very basic, well, arguably not randomized,
but a controlled trial, um, for looking for treatments
for scurvy. He was on the HMS Salisbury and
treated 10 sailors with, with different types of um
of, of treatments, including oranges and lemons, and um
discovered through that that it looked like, um, having
citrus fruit helped combat the, the symptoms of scurvy.
And, and so from that point, you know, scientists
in a way were just becoming. Over time, more
interested in just collecting data, I think, on, on
large numbers of patients, and then over time, these
methods evolved, um, but, but really, I mean, you
know, randomized controlled trials have only, um sort of
really taken off since about the, the 60s, I
would say, 60s to 70s. It's quite a recent
phenomenon.
Yes, but, but it's not like, as you alluded
to there, that people in societies prior to that,
even in more traditional societies, don't care about or
don't apply methods that allow for them to gather
evidence about whatever kind of topic they're interested. And
even for their practical lives, right? I mean, there's
not a strict division between, oh, OK, so at
a certain point science developed and we started caring
about evidence and prior to that no one cared
about evidence at all. I mean there's not that
strict division or
well, no, I mean it goes, it goes back
to what you were saying of what you count
as evidence. If you count experiential evidence of things
that we're doing every day, and observing, well, I
did this, you know, I ate this, and I
felt good, um, you know, then, then that, that
counts. We, we've been doing that for, for sort
of, you know, millennia, um, but at some point,
you know, that there's a switch to going, OK,
we can get more rigorous evidence if we move
beyond these experiential or anecdotal observations and collect information
on large numbers of people. I mean, that's what
our scientists are generally trying to do. Um, BECAUSE
of course the more data and the more people
you observe, then the more confidence you can have
in that what you're observing is a kind of
general principle. But yes, I mean, I think a
gradual evolution is, is probably correct.
So earlier you talked about Ian Chalmers and Archie
Cochrane. Tell us a little bit more, tell us
a little bit more about the history of evidence-based
medicine. I mean, how did it develop and how
did it arrive at the stage we are in
today?
Sure, so, so I, yeah, I, I told you
the story of, um, Ian's story, which was, you
know, what I encountered when I was, I was
writing the book, and, um, I mean, I'll go
on and finish that story because that was sort
of one big important part, I think, of moving,
um, medicine from being this eminence-based, you know, most
senior doctor in the room approach to the evidence-based
one. And so after he'd done this, um, synthesis
of all of. The evidence on pregnancy and childbirth,
um, he was inspired to go on and, and
do that same practice, um, across all medical specialities.
Um, SO, so, you know, what's the evidence on
effective treatments in heart disease and cancer and diabetes
and so on. And, and this was the kind
of, um, concept behind a group called the Cochrane
Collaboration, um, which Ian, And others founded in 1993,
um, and that group has become very well known
and, and still goes on today for producing these
kind of, um, gold standard, what are called systematic
reviews, which is a, which is a very rigorous,
um, analysis and combination of evidence from randomized trials,
um, and, and systematic reviews from, from Cochrane. And
also from many other scientists are now, um, formed
this kind of bedrock, almost like this invisible bedrock
of evidence, um, and, and on the basis of
that, doctors create clinical guidelines, and then the clinical
guidelines are what's used generally, um, by doctors to,
to help make decisions in the clinic. Um, SO,
so that was kind of one really important part.
But then there was this other story taking place
at the same time in, in North America, which.
Another, um, key character called David Sackett, who was
also training in medicine in the 60s and also
became really frustrated with the eminence-based, um, medicine approach.
Um, AND he moved to McMaster Medical School in
Canada, and, um, started teaching medicine in this different
way. So rather than just, um, telling students to
do what the most senior doctor said, um, he,
he taught them to, to solve problems using research.
Let's go to the library, uh. And, and see
what's been published on this topic. And that evolved,
um, into this approach, which actually got the, which
they called evidence-based medicine. Um, AND, and that term
evidence-based medicine, uh, was only published in the medical
literature in 1991. So, again, you know, quite recent.
And from that point, there was something about giving
it this name, and at that moment in time,
it kind of raced around the world. And, um,
you know, within a decade or so, it, it
was being called one of modern medicine's greatest intellects.
ACHIEVEMENT and it's become really the, the standard way
in which modern medicine is practiced. So most people
who've been to the doctor, you know, will have
been treated according to these principles of, um, of
evidence-based medicine, um, even though they might not be
aware of it. And, um, and that was kind
of, that was kind of one really big motivation
for writing the book, because I felt like it
had touched like most people's lives, and yet, you
know, they're, they're not really outside academia, it's, it's
not really well known.
So nowadays in terms of experimental designs, randomized control
trials, I, I think are the gold standard in
medicine and science more generally. But what were the
origins of randomized control trials? I mean, how were
they developed?
So, so, so I talked um about one of
the early ones with um with James Lind, and,
and over time, you know, those methods evolved, but
I, I would say another, another landmark randomized control
trial which people, you know, talk about in, in
the history of medicine was. This key one that
was done um in the 40s, um to test
streptomycin, so it was kind of the early days
of antibiotics. Um, AND, uh, streptomycin, I think was
only the second antibiotic which was was uh being
considered after penicillin. Um, AND this trial was done,
this, this was sort of really pioneering in randomization
terms, because one of the problems with, or the
difficulties with randomization is that even, is that how
do you randomize people? So, so, you, you want
to randomize people, so that you're, you're, um, assigning
equal numbers with, you know, um, the same type
of condition, or, or, or the same, you know,
age to these different groups, right? So, everything about
these groups is hopefully the same, apart from the
fact one's got a treatment and one doesn't. Um,
BUT the problem is, it's actually quite difficult to
do. So, even if, like, doctors are like, OK,
you know, I'll, I'll, the first person goes in
the, in the control group, and the next person
goes in the treatment group, um, sometimes then biases,
human biases creep in, and they sort of, um,
uh, you know, consciously or unconsciously start. Putting, let's
say, the people who are a bit more sick
in the treatment group, because they kind of want
them to get better. Um, AND, uh, Austin Bradford
Hill, who was this very famous, uh, well, became
a famous statistician, uh, realized this was a problem,
and, and he realized that blinding was important in
randomization. So in this streptomycin trial, what they did
was, um, got this series of, of envelopes, um.
And, uh, as each person was enrolled in the
trial, so these envelopes are unmarked, they would just
have to pick up the next envelope, open it
up, and, and it would say, um, S for
streptomycin or C for control. So even the doctors
who were assigning the patients to the trial couldn't
know in advance what, what group they would go
into. And over, so, so that was considered a
real landmark of showing how. Important it was, um,
to, you know, to, to make sure that there
was what's known as, as fully random allocation in,
in these trials. So, so, so that was like
one, you know, really important landmark, um, but just,
just to go back to something I said about,
you know, why they took off in medicine, I
mean, that was due to another kind of, um,
uh, basically a, a, a tragedy in, in science
around the thalidomide drug, um, so, uh, thalidomide was
given to women with, with morning sickness, um. And
uh in the US, uh the, the FDA didn't,
didn't initially approve thalidomide because the, the um person
who, who was um. RESPONSIBLE for approving it said
actually, um, you know, I, I'd like to see
a bit more safety data, basically, um, and because
of that, it, it became, later it became apparent,
um, that thalidomide was unfortunately, um, responsible for causing,
um, disability and, and many, many, uh, deaths in,
in newborn babies, um, and so, um, you know,
it helped kind of avert that tragedy in the
US but also helped the FDA. Bring in rules
which said, OK, from now on in order to
approve drugs, we're going to need to see much
more convincing data around the effectiveness of these drugs.
Um AND over time, like by the end of
the 60s, it had become standard for that evidence
to be demanded in the form of randomized trials.
And so from that point, you know, once regulators
started demanding that this was supplied, um, then the
use of randomized trials took off and, and that
kind of, you know, Um, sort of, I guess,
cemented it, shall we say, as, as the gold
standard in medicine.
How about meta-analysis, because of course today it, it
sounds very obvious to scientists and science communicators that
we should do meta-analysis that instead of just looking
at one single study or a couple of studies,
we should Look across uh the best quality studies
out there and try to figure out what the
bulk of the evidence tells us instead of again
just relying on one single, even if it is
high quality study. How did people come up with
that idea?
So, again, quite, quite a recent, um, methodology, actually.
And, and, I mean, you say it sounds really
obvious, but I don't know that, that, I don't
know that it, that it, it does in terms
of, like, you know, I mean, a lot of,
I mean, I'm a science journalist. A lot of
science journalists, I think, are just chasing it still
after the, the latest study, right? I mean, that's
why you get this phenomenon of, you know, red
wine's good for you one week, and then it's
bad for you the next, because it's just like,
well, this is What one study said, and I
think a lot of scientists too, I mean, they're
incentivized to publish the next paper, not to go
back and do a careful systematic review and meta-analysis.
So, in my view, I mean, I, I, I've
become this huge fan of systematic reviews and meta-analyses
through writing this book, but, um, you know, I
don't think they get the glory, right, that, that
randomized trials do somehow, even though they're, as you
said, they're so vitally important, um. But the, the,
the meta-analysis, um, I, I believe it was announced
in a hotel ballroom about 1974, um, and it
was devised by a, um, Uh, a, a researcher
called Jean Glass, who, uh, became interested in whether
psychoanalysis was really, um, or psychotherapy was really effective
for treating mental health disorders, because he had, he
had actually had this therapy himself and was very
convinced that it was effective even though other reviews,
which weren't so rigorous were suggesting that, that it
wasn't effective. Anyway, he, he went off and did
this like massive search. Through the, the scientific literature,
and you have to remember, you know, in, in
those days, and really until quite recently, it, uh,
it, it's very, it was very, very difficult and
laborious, right, to collect together all of the studies
which have been done on a topic, because you
have to go to the library and literally find
these things by hand in, in paper journals. Um,
AND, and he, and he want, and so he
developed this method by which you, um, can, Convert
all of the different studies, even though they're slightly
different and might have studied different outcomes into this
single, um, metric called effect size, um, and, uh,
you know, developed these statistical techniques, um, which became
known as meta-analysis in order to, to understand to
combine these studies and see what they say as
a whole. Um, SO I sort of describe it
as being a way to extract, um, the signal
from the noise.
Uh, SO, uh, I mean, uh, randomized controlled trials,
meta-analysis, systematic reviews, it seems to me that these
are all ways of trying to minimize as best
we can, uh, human, uh, error and human bias,
particularly, right? I mean, because, of course, as humans,
people tend to have their own, uh, pet theories.
That hypothesis and uh I mean unless people try
to do a randomized control trial or something in
terms of design similar to that uh I mean
people could very easily try to manipulate the results
to make their hypothesis seem more plausible or with
better or better supported so um I mean it's
just ways of trying to prevent that. Right.
Yes, yes, it is really, but, but it's absolutely
not foolproof. I mean there are lots and lots
of, of, of bad randomized trials in the world,
uh, probably more than are good ones, and so,
and that's what's interesting, so, uh, you know, with
a systematic review, what you, let's say you want
to know whether, I don't know, you know, a
statin is effective, you go off and find all
of the drug, the, The randomized trials which have
been done on statins. I mean, you might come
back with like tens of thousands or more, um,
of studies, and then you have to filter them
down for to, to the ones which are actually
good enough to include. And then they have a
whole step where you look for risk of bias,
you know, that, that remains in the study, because,
because scientists are human, right? So, of course, these
biases creep in. Um, SO a systematic review in
a way is, is a, is a, an attempt
to whittle down the randomized controlled trials to the
ones that we care about, but then of course
there's lots of really bad systematic reviews, um, which
are done too, um, which are biased or the
methods aren't that good, so, so that, I don't
know, I mean, just as a journalist, you know,
I, I, I kind of wrestle with that now
actually, because I, I have become much more, I
mean, I, I try and, you know, take my
own medicine and, and, and use more systematic reviews
now in my writing to look at the, the
body of evidence as a whole, but it's sometimes
it's very difficult for me as a, as a
non-expert to know whether this is a really good
systematic review or there's some hidden conflict of interest
or bias that I can't see, which of course
is where it's still important to be interviewing people.
So in the book you go through several examples
of domains of people's practical practical lives where evidence
can also apply or be used in different ways,
and one example that you talk about is social
policy. I mean, in what ways can evidence perhaps
improve social policy?
Yeah, so I guess in parallel to, to this
um embrace of evidence in medicine, there has been,
um, well, sometimes in parallel and sometimes after, there's,
there's been this movement in all these other fields
that I looked at to also um use evidence
to figure out what really works, so what practices
work, and in the book I look, as you
said, at policy and. Policing and conservation and all
these other fields, they are often really like inspired
by evidence-based medicine, right, they, they sort of look
in their own field and say, hm, you know,
our, our practices are all based on anecdote and
conventional opinion too, shouldn't we be using evidence to
find out what works? I mean, in, so in
social policy, the idea is that you, um, you
know, you can test whether a policy works just
the way that you would test whether a drug
works, so can we do a randomized experiment and
give some people the, the, the, the, you know,
the new program and some people not, and um,
I mean, 11 early famous example was this um
test of a, a program called Progressor in Mexico.
This has become a kind of famous um randomized
trial in, in social policy, um. And this was
in the 90s and it was a new initiative
to see if, you know, families in poverty could
be helped. Um AND some families were randomized to
get this, this program um in which they would
receive payments. The family received payments, but in order
to receive them, it came with conditions, so families
had to send their children to school, um, the,
you know, mothers had to go to health clinics.
And, and, and, you know, children had to receive
vaccines and so on. So it's, it's called a
conditional cash transfer now. Um, AND sure enough, this,
this, you know, very innovative and pioneering uh randomized
trials suggested that these families were helped long term
compared to the control group. And that, that whole
idea of conditional cash transfers, because, you know, partly
because of this convincing evidence has helped that be
embraced across different countries. Um, AND that, and that's
gone on. I mean, there's just now there's been
this sort of huge movement in, um, particularly in
development economics to, to test, uh, policies, you know,
um, does it work to give incentives to help
families have, um, to, to help, you know, encourage
families to have vaccines, for example, a whole range
of things which, which are now tested in randomized
trials to see whether they're effective.
Um, YOU mentioned policing. Uh, WHAT, uh, in what
ways can evidence be applied there also, because nowadays
people worry, uh, a lot about and with good
reason, I think, um, about biases, uh, uh, in
policing, um, like for example, uh, racial biases, gender
biases, and things like that. So how can evidence
be used to improve policy?
I mean, that, that was a whole field that
I found so fascinating to look at, because I,
I mean, I just, I, I hadn't reported on
policing before, but there's this huge global movement in
evidence-based policing, um, which again follows the same approach.
There was the same realization by some pioneers in
the field that, you know, a lot of practices
in policing are based on anecdote and conventional wisdom
or doing what we've always done, you know, could
we, could, could they use the ideas from medicine
to test what works, um. And, and, and so
a lot of that has been done. I mean
there's thousands now of studies which test practices, you
know, everything from like, you know, do body worn
cameras work, um, to hotspots policing. I mean that's
like a success story of evidence-based policing, um, so
the, the sort of standard practice, um, a few
decades ago was to do, um, random patrolling, so,
you know, police drive around the streets or roam
around the streets, kind of looking for crime. In
the idea that that's going to, to reduce it,
um, but actually through a series of, of much
more rigorous tests, um, it's been shown that actually
focusing police on the, sometimes, you know, on the
hotspots, as in the places where crime is, is
particularly high, even, you know, that might just be
a street corner, for example, um, is much more
effective at reducing crime overall. Um, SO it is
starting to change police practices, um, quite a lot
actually, in some parts of the world.
Uh, Education is also a field that unfortunately seems
to be very permeable to pseudoscience. For example, I've
already had conversations on the show about that with
people who study that phenomenon of pseudoscience in education,
and I mean, people are very unfortunately open to
ideas like learning styles and Um, I, I mean,
different ways that, uh, people can be intelligent. I
mean, the, the, um, the different types of intelligences
out there and stuff like that. So, I mean,
what would you say to people that work in
education? As to why it's very important for them
to really evaluate evidence properly in terms of what
works and what doesn't when it comes to educating
children and adolescents.
Well, I, I think the reason it's important is
it's, it can help children more. Um, I mean,
again, there, there's a vast number of really rigorous
studies in education, evidence-based education as it's, as it's
sometimes called, or evidence informed, um, that, you know,
show that, that children um move forward faster um
using certain practices and, and, um. I, I agree
with you. I mean, I think it's interesting because
there have been certain fields I've looked at where
it just seems like, you know, sort of fashions
and fads are really commonplace, um, and education is
probably one. I mean, parenting is another, um, so,
and, and also business and management. I mean, you
know, sort of where books come out, it's like,
well, you know, where's the evidence behind them? But
it, but I mean, in parenting, I've become a
really big fan of a, of a, British organization
called the Education Endowment Foundation, which has become quite
a world leader in, um, synthesizing, just like Cochrane
does for medicine, but synthesizing the evidence in education,
and they have a brilliant tool, um, called the
Teaching and Learning toolkit, which makes that very accessible
to parents and teachers. And so, and, and so
if you look at that, you can actually rank
different approaches. That's what they do. To say, OK,
you know, if I, if I invest this certain
amount of money as a school, uh, which, which
technique will, will move my, my students forward, uh,
by the most, on average? Um, AND the top
of the list is, is an approach called meta-cognition,
um, and meta-cognition, um, is basically when children think
about, learn about how they learn, or think about
how they think. So, for example, Um, if a
child, um, solves a math maths problem, and then
they go, hmm, OK, the way it really helped
me to write out my working. Like, they, they
were thinking about how they learn, and so they're,
they're, you know, able to use that in the
future. And, and the evidence suggests, I think it
would, that moves children forward if it's done properly,
like by, you know, 7 to 8 months in
an academic year, more than they would otherwise move
ahead. Um, AND also feed feedback is also really
an effective approach. So, um, you know, so, I
mean, that's why, right, uh, that's what teachers are
trying to do. Um, SO it seems, it seems
a shame if, if that evidence is not being
used. I'm, I'm not saying, by the way, I
just, just to caveat that, I, I think it's
really important to not, I don't know, point a
finger of blame, do you know what I mean,
at practitioners? I mean, teachers are really, really busy
people who are absolutely doing their best they can
for children, so I don't think it's a fault
necessarily of teachers. I mean, it's more a sort
of fault of, of the system maybe, that in
medicine, doctors learn about evidence when they train, and
they're provided with these, you know, evidence-based guidelines. It's
already sort of there for them, it's embedded in
their practice, and, and, and education and some of
these other fields, you know, haven't, haven't got that
far yet. Um, SO, you know, maybe that's where
we, we might see some progress in the future.
When it comes to parenting, which you also mentioned
there, I think it's one of those areas where
people are, I mean, not everyone, of course, but
many people are not really that willing to listen
to people who want to or they think or
they interpret as wanting to telling them how they
should parent their kids. I mean, people are really
Resistant to that in the sense that they think
that they are the ones who know better in
terms of the, for example, the knowledge and the
values they should instill in their children. So why
do you think that people should perhaps be more
open to listening to the ideas of people who
look at the evidence when it comes to parenting?
Well, well, I, I mean, I, I absolutely respect
that, you know, view, and I, and I don't,
I don't think any evidence advocate's going to get
very far if they try and, you know, force
facts down the throats of, of resistant people, right,
that's, that's not really the, the way to go.
You have to listen compassionately to people's concerns and
perhaps present, you know, the evidence in the hope
that it might be something they want to use.
I mean, So, so parenting, I think is quite
interesting, and I was interested in it, of course,
myself as a parent, um, having, as, as so
many of us have, right, just encountered this sort
of huge overwhelm of conflicting information and books and
all this stuff that you, that you get as
a parent and wondering what I was supposed to
be doing, um. So I, I think there's a
huge appetite for, for parenting skills and advice which,
which are, um, based on evidence, and to be,
and, and, and so there are, as, as in
all these other fields, there are some really kind
of pioneering people who've come up with, for example,
um, evidence-based parenting interventions, which is basically just a
way of, you know, like, Train, you know, a,
a sort of training course for parents which, which
says, well, actually, um, there's, there's quite a lot
of evidence behind these particular approaches and they can
empower you as a parent and also hopefully, I
mean there is evidence suggests that they lead to,
to, you know, better behavior and um in, in,
uh, in children. Um, AND some of it is
very, some of it aligns anyway, it's not like,
I, I think what scientists are suggesting, it's not
like it's radically different from what most parents are
doing. A lot of it is very commonsensical, you
know, responding compassionately to children, um, creating boundaries so
that children understand, you know, what's right and wrong,
very clear communication about what, what parents want from
children, so it's nothing really radical. I just think
it helps you kind of, you know, sift out
all the noise of, of advice, that's all.
OK, so, uh, before moving on to other topics,
uh, let me just ask you briefly about climate
change. I mean, in terms of, um, I mean,
evaluating evidence in the ways that we should approach
how we tackle climate change, what would you say
are the best approaches out there?
Well, that's, yes, that's a great question, because, um,
I'm not, so, so that's really where some sort
of, um, It's a bit of a frontier in
evidence synthesis, I would say, and I wrote about
that a bit in the book. So what is
clear from synthesizing evidence is, is, you know, that,
that humans are, are, are causing climate change. Uh,
WE, we, we record this as we're sitting in
a massive heat wave, um, and, um, and, and,
and that's been done with this, you know, huge
effort by the, the IPCC, um, but there's an
interesting initiative now to say, OK. Well, you know,
we know that, but what's less clear, um, is
what are the most effective ways to tackle climate
change, and there's a, there's a great initiative now
taking off, which wants to do, take the kind
of Cochrane approach of synthesizing evidence on what works
in medicine, and put it into climate solutions, and
saying, there's lots of research out there on what
could work in climate policy, but what can we
synthesize the evidence and say, what, what, Would work
the best in these, in particular contexts, um, and
that's a group called the What Works, um, Climate
Solutions, which, which is still getting it's, um, still
sort of forming and it looks like it's gonna
really feed into the next IPCC report. So I
think that's a really exciting, um, development, of course,
we need governments to listen to those solutions, um,
but at least the, the research will hopefully be
there.
So earlier we talked about randomized controlled trials, systematic
reviews, meta-analysis. So there's a hierarchy of evidence, right?
I mean, what is this hierarchy of evidence and
why does it matter? I mean, why should there
be a hierarchy when it when it comes to
evaluating evidence?
Yeah, there, there are lots of hierarchies of medicine,
and that emerged in the kind of early days
of evidence-based medicine, um, I think when doctors were
trying to sort of sort out what's the most
trustworthy, um, and generally how it works. I mean,
it's, it's, it's done in different ways and pitched
in different ways, but generally there's a pyramid, um,
and you've got normally kind of systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of randomized trials at the top, because we
talked about that, like gold standard evidence synthesis, then
you've. Randomized trials, um, then you might have, um,
very large observational studies, um, then you might have
ones with smaller numbers, like case control studies, um,
you know, individual case studies. Um, AND often at
the bottom of these original ones would be, like,
doctor's experience. But I, I think, I mean, I
think, you know, people have criticized that. So, so,
and that's because of some of the things we
talked about. I mean, just because it's, it's a
randomized trial. Doesn't mean it's a, it's a good
study, it can be a bad randomized trial, and
also I think it sort of really downgraded the
importance of some forms of evidence, like, like doctor's
experience, which is actually a really, really important part
of the decision making process. So I, I, I
feel like there's a much more kind of inclusive
approach now actually to, to evidence, um, and it's
more about how we bring together these, these different
forms and understanding that different forms of evidence are
going to suit different, different. Um, SITUATIONS, you know,
sometimes you, you can't do the randomized trial, you
just, you simply can't, it's impossible, it's too expensive,
it would take 20 years to produce results, um,
and so we need to make, make, you know,
do or, or, or bring together the best evidence
that, that we've got. Um, BUT in terms of
how they got their, their positions in the first
place, um, you know, again, it was sort of,
um, I mean, partly just because people become really
enamored with the randomized trial, but it, but, but
if it's done really well, it can eliminate these
other, uh, you know, factors or confounding factors and
really help us understand causes, basically.
Uh, OF course, at the very bottom are expert
opinions, and nowadays even people, uh, put on the
picture an even lower layer where they talk about
anecdotal evidence from non-experts. I mean, how do you
think that people should deal with expert opinion? Because
very unfortunately nowadays in the in this kind of
more anti-intellectual environment that we live in, people tend
to, or certain people tend to very easily dismiss
experts just because they're experts. I mean, how do
you think that people should deal with them?
Well, I mean, in the evidence world, um, you
know, in, in, in all the fields I've looked
at, I mean, expert opinion or, or experience is,
is, is, is absolutely part of the, the decision
making process. So, so in medicine. The, the sort
of, the principles of evidence-based medicine are, you know,
you, you are, you take evidence, and you've got
the experience of, of the clinician, really important, right,
that they've learned all this, everything that they've learned
to people, and of course, you've got the, the,
the values and preferences of the patient themselves, and
it's those three things together which would lead to
a decision. So, so you're already using these other
forms of evidence, and that's the same in all
of these other fields too. I mean, look at
policy, right? Um, I mean, if, so, so let's
say, uh, research shows that, um, this particular climate
policy works, um, you know, that doesn't mean it
was necessarily the one that's going to be introduced,
because politicians who are making that decision or policy
makers have all these other things to consider. They
have to consider politics. And, and public opinion, you
know, so, so, so evidence is one part of
the pie in the decision making process. Um, AND,
and so even, so I guess I'm saying that
because even within, you know, I, I think it's
sometimes a misconception actually around evidence that it, that
just provides simple answers, but it doesn't. Um, I
mean, the, the, the rejection of, of experts, which
is sort of slightly different, I mean, that's this
sort of populist idea, isn't it, that, um, That
which has, which has drawn in scientists, right, which
is sort of um the idea that that scientists
are part of this elite of experts and they
don't, um, understand or or appreciate or out of
tune with, um, with popular opinion or the kind
of experiences of, of normal people. And I mean,
I think that's, you know, that's been a sort
of politically fueled, er, position, um, which, which is
absolutely important to understand because it's sort of leading
to some of this kind of distrust and rejection
of evidence today.
Right, so you've already ended up answering my question
about whether whether evidence should be the only factor
in decision making, but what do you make of
forms of knowledge that are non-scientific or at least
non-scientific. According to the standards of, uh, Western science,
I think we, we could call it. I mean,
what do you make of, for example, uh, in
the what we nowadays call indi indigenous knowledge and
other forms of knowledge acquisition.
Well, I, I think that's a, it's, it's a
really important question, and I think it's one that
the kind of evidence movement that I write about
is wrestling with, is, is how, so, so it,
it's, it's very important to, to include, I think,
um, so let's say for example, you want to
know whether a, um, Uh, a, a nature, I
mean, I talked about this example in the book,
but, but, you know, what, what's the impact of
putting a nature reserve in a particular place when
it might, um, involve the displacement, let's say, of
a, um, of an indigenous group, Well, you have
to understand the lived experience of people there, of
the value to them, of that environment, um, of
everything they understand about that environment and, and that
ecosystem. So, so I think it has to be
part of the, the, the, um, The consideration, it,
it, it's, it's another form of evidence, but the
challenge for, for scientists who are maybe coming from
a sort of a, a, a, a, a different
approach is how do you integrate these completely different
forms of knowledge, and I, and I think that's
just this really fascinating question which, um, you know,
which, which people are still wrestling with, researchers are
still wrestling with, um, so, so yes, I mean,
I, very important and perhaps unanswered, I suppose, is,
is my answer to your question, we're not quite
sure how to approach it yet.
Yeah, but I mean, uh, you would agree that
at least a priori we shouldn't just, uh, dismiss
those forms of evidence and knowledge, right? Because, uh,
I, I, it seems to me that very unfortunately,
um, there are some scientists out there who tend
to have this very this very. I would call
it elitist approach to science and knowledge where even
for example when anthropologists, cultural anthropologists, for example, talk
about indigenous knowledge and perhaps how we should try
to integrate some of it with the standard science,
they Immediately dismiss that as pseudoscience or anti-science or
non-science, something like that. So I mean, I don't
think that that kind of approach and attitude is
very productive or, or is
it? Yeah, I, I completely agree with you. Yeah,
and I mean, I don't know, maybe I speak
to more enlightened people, but um. Respect for different
forms of knowledge and, and the same way that
there's more conversation between different fields in science, um,
and an understanding that you, you need all these
different forms of knowledge if we're going to solve
some of these difficult problems.
Mhm. So would you say that there's been a
crisis in people believing in evidence? Would you label
it as a crisis?
Oh, I love that you've asked me this question
because I'm, I'm, well, I'm going back to my
desk after this to, to send to press a
story I'm publishing next week about whether there's a
crisis of trust in science, so, um, this is
top of my mind. Um, SO is there, Is
there a public crisis of trust in science? So,
so having looked at some of the data, um,
I would sort of say no, but maybe yes,
um, because if you look at like, um, if
you look at big surveys that have been done
globally, um, trust in, in science and scientists consistently
comes out quite high actually, um, in the, you
know, like if you ask people, like if you
were sort of ranking professions, like scientists generally come
right near the top with like, Teachers and doctors,
and that hasn't really changed over the years. Um,
HOWEVER, um, there, there are problems, clearly, um, and
one of them is that there's a political polarization
around trust in science going on in the US.
There are hints of it elsewhere, but very strongly
in the US where trust in science has declined
amongst Republican leaning people, and it's stayed steady amongst
Democrats, and, um, you know, people I speak to
say that this sort of, um, It is sort
of being fueled by, by politicians, but also now
this is sort of being used to attack the
scientific enterprise in the US, so the sort of
idea is like, well, um, you know, we're, we're
going to dismantle these institutions of science because they're
not trustworthy. Um, SO that's like one big problem,
um, and then the other is there is some,
some research suggesting that people are more likely now
to question or reject, um, evidence on like contentious
issues like vaccines, so, so that does seem to
be going on. Um, AND part of that, from
what I, you know, understand, and of course observe
anecdotally, is that scientific information is just being drowned
out really online, right, because before, there were just
less sources of information and it was sort of,
people would turn towards trustworthy sources, because there weren't
very many of them. And now it's becoming much
harder to like filter what, what to believe, um,
certainly on social media. So, so some people I
speak to say, well, scientists are losing influence, um,
they're not necessarily losing trust, it's just their voices
aren't necessarily, or, or the scientific information isn't necessarily
being heard.
So what do you think can be done about
that? In what ways can we improve people's trust
in scientific experts and, uh, I mean, and prevent
and perhaps try to prevent as better, as best
as we can the dissemination of uh pseudoscience and
anti-science.
I mean, some of that is really, is really
complex, I think, and, and I feel like there's
just so much conversation today about, you know, how
to combat misinformation, you know, how to address this
point, point you're raising, and some of it comes
down to difficult things about technology platforms, right, because
on, on social media platforms, the algorithms tend to
promote posts which evoke outrage and emotion. Um, uh,
YOU know, not necessarily posts which are talking about
kind of dry data or scientific facts, so that's
one issue, you know, around algorithms, I think, um,
you know, and maybe holding technology platforms to account.
But, but on an individual level, I, I, I
wrote this quite, um, interesting story about how to,
um, what to say to a vaccine skeptic. Like,
this is on a much more. Kind of personal
level, um, because I thought that, like, lots of
our readers would, would maybe, you know, like me,
have these playground conversations where you talk to someone
who's got a very different view to you and
might be questioning vaccines, and then I would end
up thinking, I just, I don't actually know what
to say. But of course, researchers have studied that
problem. Um, AND, and really, the answers were, um,
you know, don't dismiss them. Um, THEY, you know,
people have very valid questions around vaccines that often
come from places of concern, of course, um, you
know, ask curious questions, you know, why do they
feel that way? Um, TRY and offer, if, if
you can, um, you know, correct. Information, such as,
you know, the, the, the benefits of vaccines outweigh
the, the harms for, for most people, according to,
like, hundreds of studies, um, and even just offer
your, your opinion or, or what you did, um,
or the choices that you made. So it's very,
it becomes very sort of, um, You know, I
think a lot of these approaches about how to
deal with, with kind of trust in science and,
and misinformation and is, is around, um, of course
it's around like human conversations, you know, it's quite
relational, um, so, I, I, you know, that that
has to be part, part of the answer, I
think.
OK, great. So the book is again Beyond Belief
How Evidence shows what really Works, and of course
I will be leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And, Helen, just before
we go apart from the book, would you like
to tell the audience where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
Uh, YES, you can connect with me on LinkedIn.
Uh, YOU can find my stories published, um, at
Nature.
OK, great. So look, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been really fun to talk with you, and I,
of course, recommend your book to my audience. It's
a fantastic book, and I think that everyone should
run and buy it and read it. So thank
you so much for doing this again.
Thank you so much. It was really fun talking
to you and thanks for your really, really good
questions.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Sverggoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.